{"title": "Sky is the limit", "content": "This is the 81st episode of Diaspora Diaries, a Nepali Times series in collaboration with Migration Lab providing a platform to share experiences of living, working and studying abroad.\nI went to Australia in 2008 because everyone was headed there. It was my first time leaving the country and my first job. My college helped me find work as a kitchen helper at a Brisbane restaurant.\nI did not know that being a kitchen helper meant washing dishes. I was young and did not know how to wash dishes or how to handle the steam, the hot water, and the busy kitchen. The utensils were thrown at the dishwashing station continuously, and water splashed on my face. My shoes and clothes were always wet.\nIt was an on-call job. A couple of days into the job, I was asked to come in when I was at the movies. I refused. They fired me. That was that.\nI then worked on a farm, picking lemons and oranges. The lemon work was particularly hard because I would get cuts all over my hands. This hustle was not for me.\nWithin a year in Australia, I decided to return to Nepal because the foreign life did not suit me. After spending eight months in Nepal, reality sank in. Nepal was not all that great either.\nI went back to Australia. On the plane, I befriended a Nepali woman who was homesick and a first time traveler. At the immigration in Australia, the officer noticed my long absence and started interrogating me. He noticed the Nepali woman waiting for me and asked who she was. Without thinking I lied that she was my girlfriend. That seemed to do the trick because he did not want us to be separated. He stamped my passport. She went her way. I went mine.\nIn Sydney, I again found a dishwashing job at a fine dining restaurant. A Sri Lankan colleague helped me learn the job. The pace at which I had to do the dishes was insane but I got the hang of it in two weeks.\nI always dreamt of one day wearing the chef\u2019s white coat. It commanded respect, I could tell. In addition to becoming good at my job washing dishes, I also had good language and networking skills so I built good relationships with colleagues.\nThere was a need for a pizza chef at the restaurant. It was expensive to hire someone new, and they asked me if I was up for the job. I said yes even though I knew nothing about making pizzas. My Italian colleagues coached me and before I knew it, I became better than others at the job.\nSoon, I realised that I did not just want to make pizzas. Whatever I wanted to learn, I just asked seniors to take me under their wings and I would help without pay. They would agree but still pay me. It wasn\u2019t a strategy per se, I genuinely wanted to learn.\nAt some point, a Japanese sous chef in my restaurant and I had coincidentally applied to the same restaurant, and there, under him, I got to learn even more. Working with a Japanese chef is really difficult, but you learn a lot. He would sometimes even hold my hand with tongs dipped in hot water when I screwed something up.\nI worked in a few restaurants after this and was earning well. When one of my colleagues, a dishwasher, was let go unfairly, I decided to leave because I did not want to be a quiet bystander to this act. I returned to Nepal immediately after this.\nI started a restaurant called Ghumti, but it was struggling. The location of the restaurants was not good and it failed. I bought another restaurant in Darbar Marg. I was managing two restaurants when Covid hit. The rent kept piling up, and there was no revenue. I took a huge loss.\nI gave them up and returned to Chitwan and started making migration plans. I came across a job vacancy for Alba in Qatar by the famous Enrico Crippa. I still remember the heat when I got out of the airport in Doha, it was like entering an oven. Thankfully, I had a Nepali roommate who showed me around and helped me adjust.\nThe hotel was still under construction, but training had started. We worked really hard for the opening and things went well. In 2023, we even won the Best MENA Restaurant award. But at some point in 2024, the international Crippa chain decided to leave.\nSome colleagues including the head chef left and I suddenly was put in charge. I had some head chef experience from Australia and had previous experience working in high pressure environments, so I stepped up. We had to start from scratch again, this time as Alba in Raffles, Doha.\nThe name of our restaurant comes from the Alba white truffle, which is the best available and is expensive, selling at around 40,000 QAR per kg. We had heard the official announcement that the Michelin was coming to Qatar, and we worked even harder.\nMichelin inspections are strict, highly secretive and you have no idea you are being investigated. Even then, we were up for the game. We were \u2018selected\u2019 which meant we had potential.\nI went to the award ceremony with low expectations. But because they announce the name alphabetically, Alba came first. I was very happy and felt validated. Being recognised as a Michelin one star restaurant is a huge achievement for us.\nMy MD reminded me of a promise I had made of getting a Michelin tattoo if we got the award. I guess I will get it done when I come to Nepal next. My plan is to get a tattoo that captures my journey right from the dishwashing days.\nI have cooked for Obama, Beckham, Kaka, Trump, 50 Cent, Lindsay Lohan, you name it, because our restaurant is visited by high profile guests. At first, I used to feel the pressure. Now I view all guests as the same. The food you make is the same no matter who is eating it.\nI love the work. In fact, it does not feel like work. The rush in the kitchen, the atmosphere, the heat, the scent, I live for it. When I am not working, I get bored. It is like an addiction without which I get withdrawals. I want to contribute in introducing Nepali cuisine and ingredients in the worldstage.\nNepalis overseas have a lot of potential in the hospitality sector. But my advice to youth is to focus on building a strong base and invest in learning. It is increasingly common for Nepalis to job hop for a salary jump. While other skills like language are also important, it is the hard skills that we really need to focus on. In our field of work, it is the plate that needs to speak.", "url": "https://nepalitimes.com/here-now/sky-is-the-limit", "scraped_at": "2026-01-28T16:53:05.474887"}
{"title": "Nepal\u2019s slow grammar of democracy", "content": "The slow, arduous labour of democracy rarely announces itself with the fanfare of constitutional moments. \u00a0It proceeds instead through committee rooms, ward meetings, half-attended assemblies, the awkward choreography of speech and silence, and the everyday compromises between aspiration and constraint.\nThe book Nepal\u2019s Federalism and the Pursuit of Deliberative Democracy attends precisely to this unglamorous terrain. In it, Vishnu Kumari Tandon does not ask whether democracy is desirable \u2014 an already settled question \u2014 but whether it can be made to think, to listen, and to endure under conditions of inequality, historical fracture, and institutional novelty.\nHer wager is modest yet demanding: that federalism, when tethered to participatory planning and deliberative fors, might recalibrate the relationship between state and citizen without promising redemption.\nTandon\u2019s Nepal is neither a site of democratic salvation nor a study in failure. It is a space of trial, where ideas migrate from constitutional text to municipal practice, altered by context, power, and expectation. Democracy here appears not as an ideal form but as a situated practice -- procedural, contested, and unfinished.\nThe book\u2019s quiet achievement lies in redirecting debates on deliberative democracy away from abstract normativity and toward the ethical friction of lived institutions.\nFederalism arrives in Nepal not as a technocratic reform but as a historical concession, wrested from conflict, exclusion, and prolonged political unrest. Tandon, who is a governance consultant at the World Bank, situates the 2015 Constitution within this unsettled genealogy, treating federalism less as an administrative innovation than as a moral response to longstanding claims of marginalisation.\nThe constitutional recognition of local autonomy is thus freighted with ethical expectation. Yet the book refuses to equate decentralisation with empowerment. Federalism, Tandon insists, redistributes power without dissolving hierarchy.\nDomination may simply reappear closer to home. The central question, therefore, is not whether local governments exist, but how they govern: whether institutionalised participation genuinely alters the terms on which citizens speak, decide, and contest public priorities.\nFederalism emerges not as a stable structure but as a field of tension\u2014between autonomy and dependence, inclusion and capture, aspiration and capacity. It is within this unstable terrain that the democratic experiment unfolds.\nUNEQUAL SKIES\nParticipation, one of democracy\u2019s most invoked terms, often risks conceptual exhaustion. Tandon restores its weight by treating participation as labour rather than ritual. Drawing on fieldwork in Buddhabhumi and Dhanushadham municipalities, she reconstructs the choreography of local planning: assemblies, committees, and councils through which proposals circulate, stall, or vanish.\nParticipation here is unevenly distributed. It is shaped by gendered expectations, caste hierarchies, economic precarity, and anticipations of return. Attendance becomes a calculation rather than a civic reflex. This analytical attention to motivation marks one of the book\u2019s strengths.\nCitizens participate not out of abstract virtue but through pragmatic reasoning, moral obligation, and strategic interest. Participation thus appears neither ennobling nor cynical, but politically intelligible.\nIf participation concerns presence, deliberation concerns voice \u2014 and, crucially, whose voice matters. Tandon\u2019s engagement with deliberative democratic theory is respectful yet revisionist. Habermasian ideals of reasoned consensus are treated as aspirational rather than portable, strained by structural inequality.\nIn municipal assemblies, deliberation is patterned by authority: who speaks first, who commands attention, whose claims are legitimised. Marginalised citizens may be present without influence, audible without consequence. Deliberation risks becoming procedural affirmation rather than substantive redistribution of voice.\nYet Tandon does not abandon deliberation as a democratic practice. Instead, she broadens its normative horizon. Drawing on second-generation deliberative theory, she legitimises emotion, self-interest, and strategic speech as components of democratic reasoning. Deliberation becomes a contested exchange rather than a purified rationality. The common good, if it appears, emerges provisionally: negotiated rather than presumed.\nOne of the book\u2019s most original contributions lies in its treatment of fiscal decentralisation. Money is not merely a resource but a language through which priorities are articulated and participation structured. The devolution of budgetary authority transforms deliberation into distributive politics.\nCitizens attend assemblies not simply to speak but to secure roads, water systems, clinics, schools. Voice is tethered to material expectation. This proximity intensifies engagement while sharpening conflict. Fiscal autonomy thus amplifies the stakes of deliberation without guaranteeing its equity.\nLocal representatives emerge as paradoxical figures: empowered yet constrained, accountable yet insulated. Tandon resists binary judgments, showing instead how fiscal decentralisation deepens democratic possibility while exposing institutional fragility.\nThreaded through the book is a sustained interrogation of the \u2018common good\u2019. Revered in theory and suspect in practice, the concept is neither discarded nor sanctified. In unequal societies, appeals to the common good can obscure asymmetries of sacrifice.\nEmpirically, deliberation proceeds through articulated self-interests: neighbourhood demands, caste claims, gendered priorities. Far from undermining democracy, these claims animate it. Self-interest becomes deliberation\u2019s motor rather than its negation.\nThe book thus advances a quiet ethical argument: democracy does not require the transcendence of interest, but its articulation under conditions of mutual visibility. The common good, if it exists, is emergent, fragile, and revisable.\nInstitutions, for Tandon, are moral technologies. Laws mandate participation, but they cannot generate trust, courage, or equality. Procedural compliance may coexist with substantive exclusion. Yet repetition matters. Even imperfect fora can cultivate habits of speaking and being heard.\nDeliberative democracy, the book suggests, is not an event but a discipline, learned slowly, unevenly, and reversibly. Federalism is less a solution than a condition: one that opens space for democratic learning without securing its outcome.\nFirmly grounded in Nepal\u2019s political history, the book resists parochialism. Nepal functions as a mirror, reflecting broader dilemmas of democratic deepening across unequal societies. Comparative resonances with Brazil, India, and donor-driven governance reforms are handled without formula or prescription. Nepal is neither an exemplar nor an exception. It is a site where democracy reveals its ordinary difficulties.\nThe prose mirrors the argument: careful, analytic, resistant to grand claims. What lingers is not a verdict but a sensibility: an attentiveness to democracy\u2019s tempo. Deliberative democracy appears less as consensus achieved than as disagreement sustained without rupture.\nIn an age of democratic impatience, Tandon offers a quieter ethic. Democracy must be allowed to think slowly, to falter, and to learn. This book stands as a thoughtful companion to that discipline, reminding us that democratic transformation often occurs far from the centre, in places where speaking itself remains an achievement.\nAftab Husain is a Pakistan-born poet and literary and cultural critic. He teaches South Asian literature and culture at the University of Vienna.", "url": "https://nepalitimes.com/review/nepal-s-slow-grammar-of-democracy", "scraped_at": "2026-01-28T16:53:06.026000"}
{"title": "Turning trash into sculptures", "content": "A mighty metal bird, \u2018Heron on Hunt\u2019 spreads its wings and unhinges its mouth hungrily. It looks down at \u2018The Defending Crab,\u2019 which has windshield wipers for legs and opens its pincers defiantly at the heron, daring it to attack.\nThe crab shell is made of a ceiling fan, the blades of which have been cut up to form the bird\u2019s wings.\n\u201cThe story is that you are what you eat,\u201d says artistSaurab Koirala, whose solo exhibition \u2018Metamorphosis\u2019 atTaragaon Nexthas sculptures made of material retrieved from garbage warehouses.\nKoirala was in the studio when protestors ransacked the adjacent Hyatt Hotel on 9 September. The windows of the iconic museum designed byarchitect Carl Pruschain the 1960s were all shattered, but the studio survived. He used the broken glass to make fins for his fish sculptures and wings for insects.\nMetamorphosis is a reference to the transformation of trash into art, but it is also fitting because many of the repurposed items are of insects: a firefly, a dung beetle, a spider, a dragonfly, a queen ant.\nThe most striking are the pair of praying mantises, the smaller one is black, made of windshield wipers, and the larger grey one is made of a motorcycle silencer, bicycle parts, and a fluorescent tube holder.\nAbout the unrealistic size difference, Koirala notes that each piece is made of a component that defines its size. For the larger grey mantis, the defining piece is the silencer that makes up its torso.\n\u201cThe mantises are mating,\u201d Koirala explains. \u201cThe female mantis will cannibalise the male afterwards, and the dragonfly witnesses the whole scene.\u201d\nIt is possible to look at each installation and immediately recognise what it is meant to be, but on looking closer we see what the parts are made of, and how. The exhibition is from Koirala\u2019s Taragaon Next residency program sponsored by the Saraf Foundation.\nKoirala thinks of himself as primarily a painter and a caricature artist, and not a sculptor. His mother was a teacher, and would make miniature animals, gods, houses for her students.\n\u201cSeeing how happy she was doing that made me want to do it too, although she did not want me to be an artist,\u201d Koirala recalls. Some of his mother\u2019s creations are also on display at the exhibition.\nKoirala got more experience working with 3D models digitally in his work at Incessant Rain animation studio, especially animals. This seems to have given him strong visualisation skills that he has put to use in the art pieces, using minimal bending and cutting.\nKoirala participated in the WastArt Competition in 2018, where his Danphe sculpture made from colourful coke and soda cans was so striking that it became a part of the permanent collection at the Sagarmatha Next Art Gallery in Syangboche. Koirala worked in the studio in Khumbu, fashioning yaks and bees out of trekking trash.\n\u201cMy back hurts,\u201d he grimaces as he opens the doors to the studio, an unassuming shed a short walk from the exhibition which is littered with metal spare parts for future art. He has gone through three whole bicycles with a power saw.\nKoirala seems to want to alter the scrap as little as possible, and it is uncanny how well some of it fits the pieces. The aerodynamic curved fuel tank of a Bajaj Avenger motorcycle becomes the abdomen of a gigantic queen ant. A mosquito repellent becomes the green body of a spider. A stapler and a coconut turn into a snail. The steel legs of a rolling office chair curve exactly into the legs and paws of a fox in motion.\n\u201cI did not want the animals to be in static poses. I wanted to capture dynamic movement,\u201d says Koirala. Fittingly, most of the parts he has chosen have come from vehicles: bicycles, motorcycles, scooters, car horns, air filters.\nWhile Koirala\u2019s work in his Sagarmatha Next residency was about waste encroaching into nature in the mountains, his work in Metamorphosis is a nostalgic memory of a happy childhood in Biratnagar.\n\u2018There used to be abundant dragonflies in my hometown,\u2019 writes Koirala in his description. \u201cAs kids, we would catch them and tie threads to their tails and fly them like kites.\u201d\nThe message about the degradation of nature is more valid than ever. The world is seeing the mass extinction of insects, and uncontrolled urbanisation of polluted Kathmandu Valley means only ants and some spiders survive.\nArtist in Studio #9:Metamorphosis\nTaragaon Next\nTill 30 January\n10AM-5:30PM", "url": "https://nepalitimes.com/review/turning-trash-into-sculptures", "scraped_at": "2026-01-28T16:53:06.906453"}
{"title": "\u201cJust walk on\u201d", "content": "The Kathmandu Valley has attracted an exceptional number of outstanding and accomplished foreigners over the decades, but few as extraordinary as Marilyn Silverstone (1929-1999).\nFrances Klatzel\u2019s book A Portrait of Ourselves, Marilyn Silverstone: From Photojournalist to Buddhist Nun, is a fitting and fascinating biographical celebration of this American woman whose life of unusual choices took her, as the title suggests, from an affluent Jewish childhood in Scarsdale, New York to becoming an acclaimed and adventurous Magnum photographer.\nRoving the world, her camera captured many of the most iconic events of the 20th century, her images were published in Time, Life, Newsweek, Look, National Geographic, Paris Match, Vogue and other magazines.\nFollowing the teachings of Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche, Marilyn Silverstone devoted the last twenty years of her eventful life to living quietly and practising Buddhism in Nepal. Ordained as a Buddhist nun, she took vows in the sanctified Solukhumbu precincts of Thubten Choling with Venerable Trulshik Rinpoche in the spring of 1977.\nLiving in Kathmandu until her death in Shechen Monastery, which she helped create, Marilyn wrote: \u2018When I look back over the years, although I did not know it at the time, ending my life as a Buddhist nun was logical and inevitable.\u2019\nAni Marilyn was a familiar figure amid the sacred spaces of the Valley, the lanes of Boudha and even Kathmandu\u2019s drawing rooms during my early years in Nepal, a large smiling presence draped in maroon robes, dyed sneakers, slightly whiskered, robust.\nAs a wedding gift she gave Tenzin and I an inscribed copy of her slim volume, Ocean of Life, aptly named for the span of her achievements and expansive embrace \u2013 editor, translator, writer, filmmaker, photographer, journalist and Buddhist nun. Marilyn\u2019s nephew wrote: \u2018Her legacy was that she was always herself no matter what chapter of her life that she was living.\u2019\nWorking with a wide range of impeccable sources, Frances Klatzel has assembled first-hand the personal recollections and unsparing insights from Marilyn\u2019s most intimate friends. One of these, Jane Abell Coon, wrote the Introduction. She was a well-known person in 1980s Kathmandu whose husband Carlton Coon served as American Ambassador to Nepal and she simultaneously as American Ambassador in Bangladesh.\nThe book begins with a rare message from the 14th Dalai Lama and a touching Foreword by Venerable Rabjam Rinpoche. It ends with exquisite excerpts from a Buddhist religious tract that Marilyn had translated from its traditional Tibetan text.\nMarilyn\u2019s initial trip to India was to photograph Ravi Shankar in 1955, the classical sitar maestro. Increasingly fascinated by \u2018the complex and compassionate culture\u2019 of Tibet, her Himalayan archives include images throughout India, Nepal, Sikkim and Bhutan.\nThe first internationally accredited photojournalist to base herself in India, from 1959 Marilyn lived in Bombay then Delhi, with her lifelong partner Frank Moraes, the Goan journalist, writer, commentator and first Indian editor of the Times of India after Independence.\nINDIAN INFLUENCERS\nI remember being taken to meet the legendary Frank Moraes in 1973, by then politically exiled in Marilyn\u2019s elegant but chaotic London house, a magnet for South Asian intellectuals. She was not there, but Frank\u2019s son the poet Dom Moraes was slumped desultory on a sagging sofa. My impression of Frank was well-dressed, polite and slightly distracted.\nMarilyn\u2019s talent for friendship and wide network of Indian influencers and princely connections gave her unique access to historic events, as well as recording refugees, rituals, droughts, floods, famines and funerals. In addition to maharajahs and global leaders, her images portray personal moments, ordinary people, unflinching pain and flashes of joy. She said: \u2018In my job, the closer you get to people, the better off you are.\u2019\nThis book is illustrated with a thrilling trove of pictures of and by Marilyn, many of which reflect the impact of Henri Cartier-Bresson who signed her up as one of the first women to join his prestigious Magnum photo cooperative.\nHer assignments ranged across warzones in Vietnam, the Shah of Iran\u2019s coronation, and Russian tanks rolling into Prague. Marilyn\u2019s 1960s involved constant travel, her Magnum beat was the \u2018Far East\u2019, from Pakistan and Bangladesh to China, Korea, and Japan.\nWith a knack at being in the right place at the right time, Marilyn was the only western woman journalist to record the arrival from Lhasa into \u2018safety and exile\u2019 of the young Dalai Lama in 1959. She was at Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru\u2019s funeral in Delhi, the Chogyal of Sikkim\u2019s marriage to Hope Cooke, and with Jacqueline Kennedy on a small boat at the Lake Palace of Udaipur.\nMarilyn snapped the Pope giving blessings in Bombay, Mother Teresa attending to the poor, and the Beatles on their way to meet the Maharishi. With Frank, she travelled to Africa and shot Emperor Haile Selassie in Ethiopia, Nigeria\u2019s independence celebrations, and a very old and solar-topied Dr Albert Schweitzer in his jungle hospital in Gabon.\nA Portrait of Ourselves, Marilyn Silverstone: From Photojournalist to Buddhist Nun, is a highly recommended tribute to an inspirational life, told with discerning honesty and private perceptions by those who knew her best.\nHer monastic years living in Nepal continued to feature travel, hard work, undiminished curiosity, dogged fights for right, uncompromising support for others, disdain for conformity and battles with ill health, but all with her characteristic good humour.\nMarilyn leaves us with some sound advice in her own words: \u201cI can say that I did it all. The secret though is just keep walking through life without analysing it too much or clinging to it too much. Just walk on.\u201d", "url": "https://nepalitimes.com/review/just-walk-on", "scraped_at": "2026-01-28T16:53:07.525801"}
{"title": "Policing the Police", "content": "Monday, 8 September marked thelargest single-day, state-led massacre of protestersin Nepal\u2019s recent history. The indiscriminate firing of automatic weapons on the GenZ demonstrators for over three hours killed 21 people. Most were below 28, waiting to fly overseas as migrant workers.\nThis sparked the violence of the following day that ultimately left 76 people dead. Postmortem reports show that the protesters on 8 September wereshot directly in the chest, head, and abdomen.\nDuring the GenZ protests, the Nepal Army also killed 10 prisoners who were attempting to flee jails. Yet, no one questioned or condemned the Army for taking such lethal measures.\nBrutality andextrajudicial killingsby the security forces are not uncommon in Nepal. They peaked during the Maoist conflict, and recur often. What happened during the GenZ protests was a continuation of culture.\nDuring theMadhes Movement in 2015, the K P Oli-led regime was also responsible for more than 50 deaths. Police forces shot and killed 16 people. In Janakpur, a police officer shot and killed a 14-year-old child, Nitu Yadav, at point-blank range while he was trying to hide behind some bushes.\nAccording to witnesses, the masked police officer forced the child to the ground, shot him in the head, and kicked him while shouting, \u201cShoot this motherf**ker.\u201d No police chiefs were held accountable for these atrocities. The state has still not released the Laal Aayog Report, which investigatedkillings in the Tarai.\nIn 2026 the Armed Police Force (APF) shot and killed rickshaw driver Bijay Shah in sunsari while he was transporting goods across the border. From 2017 to 2021, at least 22 people died in police custody alone, most of them Madhesi and Dalits.\nPolice routinely described these deaths as suicides, yet this was never independently verified. In Shah\u2019s case, the APF claimed without evidence that he died in a crossfire. Police institutions continue to functionas they did under the Panchayat regime. In the absence of proper investigation, there is impunity and the killings go on.\nThis lack of accountability means that the Nepali state has normalised killings by its security apparatus. When pressed about shooting protesters outside Parliament in September, Prime Minister KP Oli and Police Chief Chandra Kuber Khapung defended themselves saying, \u201cBullets do not have eyes.\u201d\nThere wasno remorse or empathy, and a refusal to accept responsibility. They failed to acknowledge that the state has a constitutional mandate to protect its citizens, including those accused of crimes.\nThose in power routinely shift the blame onto protesters. In reality, police often initiate intimidation and violence at otherwise peaceful protests, as seen on 8 September. According to witnesses, protesters only became agitated after Nepal Police started firing tear gas, and shooting one of the demonstrators.\nThe Gauri Bahadur Karki Judicial Investigation Commission has not yet filed its report. But there will be justice only when then-Prime Minister KP Oli, Home Minister Ramesh Lekhak, and Kathmandu CDO Chhabi Rijal are held accountable for their actions or inaction. But it should not end there -- all police officers involved in the killings must also face justice.\nNo government or political leader in the past decades has tried toreform police to end their impunity. Politicians in power and police forces maintain an unspoken, unholy nexus \u2013 from the local to the state level. It is a mutual protection arrangement. Those in power rely on the police to maintain their power and even prosecute opponents, while the police depend on them for political patronage.\nTo be sure, Nepal Police just reflects thestate of the country\u2019s democracy, as well as its lack of commitment to human rights and the rule of law. Genuine reform and democratisation of the police force is needed to uphold human rights and the Constitution, and increase institutional diversity with greater representation of women, Dalits, Madhesi, indigenous and the traditionally excluded.\nTheAPF was originally formedto suppress the Maoist armed conflict and is now used to quell public protests. It should be dismantled, and the post of Chief District Officer abolished.\nThe Office of the Attorney General and the National Human Rights Commission have repeatedly failed to address police killings and torture. A strong independent mechanism is needed to investigate abuses of power and prosecute those responsible.\nThe argument is that holding police to account will damage their morale. Actually, ending impunity and enforcing accountability would enhance the police\u2019s public image and strengthen the institution, enabling it to maintain law and order without turning into a killing machine.\nMore importantly, we need to designstate institutionsto be empathetic. Only then will society embody tolerance. If culture of killing is accepted, it fosters violence. This is what happened on 9 September. The mayhem was no coincidence.\nPolice killings and abuse of power, and their entrenched impunity, have led to mounting public anger towards the state and resentment towards the system. If this continues unchecked, it will threaten the very stability of democracy that these institutions are supposed to safeguard.\nPrashanta Khanal is an independent climate and transport policy researcher.", "url": "https://nepalitimes.com/opinion/guest-editorial/policing-the-police", "scraped_at": "2026-01-28T16:53:08.094484"}
{"title": "Moonie money in Nepal\u2019s politics", "content": "Leaked letters from Korea\u2019s Unification Church have revealed its extensive involvement in buying political and media influence worldwide, including links to Nepal\u2019s parties and politicians.\nDocuments obtained by theKorean Centre for Investigative Journalism(Newstapa) andDuniacontain correspondence to and from the controversial religious movement whose leader, 82-year-oldHak Ja Han, is currently on trial in Seoul for allegedly bribing the wife and associates of disgraced former president Yoon Suk Yeol.\nThe letters and direct messages referenced in the investigation mention three former prime ministers: Madhav Kumar Nepal who has now joined the Nepali Communist Party, K P Oli of the Communist Party of Nepal UML (Unified Marxist-Leninist), and former Maoist ideologue Baburam Bhattarai.\nThe documents detail financial support from the Unification Church (now known as Family Federation for World Peace and Unification) to Nepal Paribar Dal (Nepal Family Party) and its founderEk Nath Dhakal,who is a staunch ally of the UML. On Sunday, Dhakal signed an MoU with K P Oli of the UML to cooperate in the March election and beyond.\nThe leaked correspondence concerning Nepal spans the period between thefirst federal elections in 2017till the 2022 polls and contains emails between Dhakal and Yong Jeong Shik, Regional President for Asia of the Unification Church, with urgent requests for funds for campaigning and to support the UML.\n\u2018Regarding funding, I am truly sorry, but a minimum of $500,000 is required,\u2019 one of the messages to Yong in the report says. \u2018Furthermore, as the election is scheduled for December 7th [2017], I would be very grateful if I could receive it as soon as possible. The initial $500,000 was used for overall election expenses, and the additional $500,000 is intended for campaign activities for the Family Party and supporting key leaders.\u2019\nIn addition, there are also letters requesting an additional $20,000 per month in \u2018maintenance costs for the Nepal Family Party and preparations for the2022 election\u2019.\nAsked for a reaction to the allegations, Govinda Nath Mishra of the Nepal Paribar Party said: \u201cThis is an unnecessary smear campaign against our party. Parties doing good work are always linked to some foreign powers in Nepal to discredit them.\u201d\nEk Nath Dhakal has also denied that his party\u2019s affiliation with the UML has anything to do with Unification Church donations.He told Nepali Times in an interview in 2016: \u201cThe party has links to all faiths, as it has with the unification movement. The Nepal Family Party is a kind of conservative party with a manifesto that promotes family values, interfaith dialogue and harmony. There are 11 political parties supporting Prime Minister Oli. Nepal Family Party is just one of them.\u201d\nIn another update to Yong, Dhakal describes the UML\u2019s election campaign in 2017 as \u2018proceeding very successfully \u2026 it appears certain the Unified Marxist-Leninist will achieve a landslide victory\u2019. Dhakal was not contesting directly as a candidate, but piggybacking on the UMLwhich had put him on the proportional representation list, ostensibly in return for campaign financing.\nHe continues: \u2018It is certain that I will be elected as a proportional representation member of the National Assembly due to a shortage of female candidates. I discussed the possibility of my election with Prime Minister Madhav and Prime Minister K P Oli \u2026 both have confirmed that I could be moved from 5th place [on the PR list] to 1st or 2nd if necessary.\u2019\nEk Nath Dhakal became Minister of Poverty Alleviation and Cooperatives under Prime Minister Baburam Bhattarai in 2012 and in 2016 Minister of peace and Reconstruction under the K P oli government.\nDuring his tenure, Dhakal organised an \u2018Asia-Pacific Summit 2018\u2019 in Kathmandu presided over by Hak Ja Han, wife of Rev Sun Myung Moon, founder of the Unification Church and Universal Peace Federation (UPF). The couple are known in the movement as \u2018True Parents\u2019 and Hak Ja Han is referred to as \u2018True Mother\u2019.\nOli addressed the Kathmandu summit which was attended by 1,500 delegates, including Burmese leader Aung San Suu Kyi and Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen. Thegathering drew criticismfor being a proselytisation exercise, prompting Oli to decline attending a \u2018blessing\u2019 ceremony by Hak Ja Han.\nEver since, the \u2018Holy Wine\u2019 has entered Nepal's political lexicon, and is still used derogatorily to label politicians involved.\nNepal Paribar Party\u2019s Govinda Nath Mishra says: \u201cEk Nath Dhakal has become a member of the House of Representatives twice, and our party has since its inception been close to the UML. We are just continuing that cooperation for this election as well.\u201d\nThe Unification Church has said that the leaked documents are not authentic and were unofficial records created by former Director General of the Unification Church\u2019s International Headquarters Yun Young Ho to \u2018flaunt his influence\u2019. The Japanese branch of the Unification Church said in a statement this week: \u2018After reviewing the documents believed to be the report in question, we have found factual inaccuracies were added or content modified.\u2019\nMilan Kumari Rajbanshi, deputy General-Secretary of the Nepal Paribar Party and former MP denied her party was funded by any outside source, and she was no aware of any correspondence between Dhakal and anyone else.\nShe told Nepali Times: \u201cAfter the September street protests we spoke to many political parties, including GenZ activists, but the UML was the closest to our values.\u201d Rajbanshi will be campaigning in Jhapa-5 on behalf of K P Oli who will be contesting against former Kathmandu mayor Balen Shah.\nThe Newstapa leak show Dhakal and the Unification Church worked behind the scenes in the 2017 election to influence the \u00a0elections. One email from Dhakal references this: \u2018(If) we can secure a majority in next year\u2019s general election \u2026 our wish is to educate all parliamentarians for two years until 2020 and create a constitution centred on Cheon Il Guk.\u2019\nCheon Il Guk (\ucc9c\uc77c\uad6d) means \u2018One Heavenly Kingdom\u2019 and is the vision of a spiritual nation proclaimed by Sun Myung Moon and his Unification Church, and emphasises family values instead of individualism for global unity under a \u2018Heavenly Parent\u2019.\nThe emails reveal that the Church was planning to convince Madhav Nepal and K P Oli to take all 150 coalition legislators to Bangkok to introduce them to its beliefs. That trip did not materialise, but the Church had earlier taken 20 Communist MPs to the Philippines and Thailand for \u2018principle education\u2019.\nIn another email to Yong Jeong Shik, Dhakal describes Baburam Bhattarai as being \u2018disillusioned with communism\u2019 and that he proposed \u2018gathering all minority parties to join the Family Party\u2019. Bhattarai left the Maoists and is contesting from the Pragatisheel Loktantrik Party from his Gorkha constituency in March.\nDespite its connections with Nepal\u2019s Communists, the Unification Church is known to support conservative politics around the world including through ownership of media likeThe Washington Timesnewspaper.\nFounder Sun Myung Moon was deeply involved in pushing for Korean unification, and the Church has worked with Asian countries that have ties with North Korea.\nDocuments show that the Unification Church had tried to get then UML Chair Madhav Kumar Nepal to Pyongyang, but the Nepal government supposedly under pressure from the South Korean, Japanese and US ambassadors got him to call it off. Madhav Nepal had also insisted that he meet Kim Jong Un, but the North Korean side had said it was not possible.\nBut after Nepal left the UML to form the Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Socialist) he met the North Korean Ambassador in the presence of Ek Nath Dhakal to plan a visit in order to work towards Korean unification. A 11-member delegation composed of Nepal, Dhakal, MPs and a newspaper publisher visited North Korea in 2017 (pictured below).\nMETICULOUS ARCHIVE\nAn extract from correspondence is indicative of the former prime minister\u2019s links to the Unification Church: \u2018Madhav Kumar Nepal \u2026 maintains a very close relationship with us and could become Prime Minister again at any time. There is no one who knows us as well or respects the Parents as much as former Prime Minister Madhav does \u2026 he is someone who regards the True Parents like God.\u2019\nThe internal documents of the Unification Church obtained by Newstapa is called the \u2018TM [True Mother] Special Report\u2019 and appears to have been prepared for Hak Ja Han. The 3,212-page text provides a chronological account of the Church\u2019s management of politicians internationally, its handling donations, and plans to expand political influence through its affiliated media outlets.\nThe document is a meticulous archive apparently compiled by Yun Young Ho, the former Director General of the Unification Church\u2019s International Headquarters, the organisation\u2019s second-in-command.\nThis suggests church affairs were reported directly to Hak Ja Han. Korean investigators are now focusing on whether Han merely received these reports or issued specific directives based on them.\nYun testified during the trial in Seoul that the Church\u2019s regional leaders and local partners would send daily field reports which he would synthesise into a \u2018Special Report\u2019 format to provide oral briefings to Han.\nHak Ja Han therefore may have been personally involved in the Church\u2019s operations in granular detail. Korean special prosecutors are viewing these documents as critical evidence in her trial to prove that she was directly involved in political lobbying.\nLast week, during a hearing on the Hak Ja Han bribery case, a regional Church leader admitted to personally drafting segments of the \u2018True Parents Correspondence Report\u2019 featured in the document.\nThe \u2018TM Special Report\u2019 appears to be a compilation of internal documents reprocessed into a single file and includes emails and direct messaging. Certain periods are missing, leading to gaps in the narrative, raising the possibility that specific portions of the report may have been selectively curated or redacted.\nBuddhism spread northwards across the Himalaya from Nepal to China and Korea 1,000 years ago, but in the past decades two of Korea\u2019s powerful ideologies have come to Nepal.\nNepal\u2019s leftist movement, most notably the Nepal Workers Peasants Party (NWPP)inspired by North Korea\u2019s Kim Il Sung\u2019s Juche Ideaespouses a nationalist agenda, and has a strong base in Bhaktapur. Meanwhile, South Korea\u2019s Unification Church of Sun Myung Moon has influenced Nepal\u2019s political, administrative and religious spheres.\nAfter establishment of Moon\u2019s Universal Peace Federation (UPF) in 2005, the Church has a sizable presence in Nepal. The movement\u2019s leader is Ek Nath Dhakal of the Nepal Paribar Party (above) who is affiliated with the UML and even served as a minister in a UML-Maoist coalition after being nominated as a PR member to Parliament.\nHe told this paper in 2016: \u201cI am a Hindu, associated with the Unification Movement.\nThe UPF staged one of its mass weddings at Dashrath Stadium in Kathmandu in 2017 (below). The movement recruits public figures like former president Bidya Devi Bhandari, Madhav Kumar Nepal and others as Ambassadors for Peace. Before he died in 2012 at age 92, Rev Moon had picked Nepal as a \u2018model peace nation of God\u2019. The Church says it embraces all religions, and does not even display the Christian cross at its places of worship.\nWhile young Nepalis follow South Korean pop culture fever, in Bhaktapur it is Kim Il Sung\u2019s Juche Idea that is the dominant ideology. The Nepal Workers Peasants Party has won just about every district and local election from Bhaktapur, not so much for its politics, but because its representatives have performed well.\nBhaktapur\u2019s following of Kim Il Sung is based on Bijukchhe\u2019s vision that his town be self-reliant and deliver development equitably.\nIn 2022, the Unification Church (Family Federation for World Peace and Unification) arranged a meeting between Yoon Suk Yeol, who was then presidential candidate, and former US Vice President Mike Pence just before South Korean elections. The visit was timed for the \u2018World Summit 2022\u2019 hosted by the Universal Peace Federation (UPF), a Unification Church affiliate.\nThe visit was widely covered by the media at the time, but a Newstapa investigation last year confirmed that the Church paid Pence $550,000 to visit Seoul. The visit was designed to bolster Yoon\u2019s diplomatic and security credentials and appeal to religious voters. Yoon knew Pence was a devout Christian, and media at the time reported that both prayed before the meeting.\nJust like the UPF\u2019s World Summit 2018 in Kathmandu, Cambodian PM Hun Sen was in attendance as was former UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.\nThe welcome remark at the Summit was delivered by Yun Young Ho, then-Director General of the Unification Church\u2019s World Headquarters. South Korean Special Prosecutors are currently investigating Yun for allegedly bribing former president Yoon Suk Yeol\u2019s wife Kim Keon Hee.\nNewstapa also dug up Pence\u2019s financial disclosures filed with the US Office of Government Ethics and the Federal Election Commission and found that Pence reported receiving $550,000 from the UPF for \u2018a speaking engagement\u2019 in Seoul in 2022 \u2014 an unusually hefty fee.\nCambodian Premier Hun Sen has hosted K P Oli several times in Phnom Penh, once as prime minister in 2019, and again last year in August. There seems to be a similar nexus between Hun Sen, the UPF and former President Yoon and his wife Kim Keon Hee.\nWhen he became president in 2022, Yoon visited Cambodia with his wife, and South Korea doubled its development assistance to Cambodia to $1.5 billion. The Special Prosecutor in Seoul is investigating allegations that the Unification Church provided funds to Kim Keon Hee in helping a Mekong River project in Cambodia.", "url": "https://nepalitimes.com/here-now/moonie-money-in-nepal-s-politics", "scraped_at": "2026-01-28T16:53:08.955117"}
{"title": "Ladies not first-past-the-post", "content": "Of the total 18,903,689 registered voters for Nepal\u2019s 5 March election, nearly half are women. But around 10% of the 3,484 first-past-the-post (FPTP) candidates are female.\nRSP, the party that claims to represent the voice of the September protests, has the highest percentage of direct women candidates at 9%. All the other legacy parties, including UML, NC, NCP and RPP fielded just 6% female direct candidates.\nThe Constitution requires 33% seats in Parliament for women, but the Election Commission has not enforced it. Political parties try to fulfil the quota through Proportional Representation (PR), but even that does not make up one-third of the candidates.\nParties allocate women in constituencies where they are sure to lose, and ironically this means women candidates from the PR list have a better chance of becoming lawmakers than those contesting direct elections.\n\u201cMost women candidates are given tickets where stronger male candidates from established parties are contesting, ensuring their loss,\u201d explains Babita Basnet of Media Advocacy Nepal that works on improving gender representation.\nThe PR list was supposed to safeguard the representation of marginalised and excluded groups, but many women PR candidates are celebrities, businesswomen \u2014 defeating the whole purpose of such affirmative action.\nMany parties have included relatives and cronies in the lists which means that in the grand scheme of things, women get a consolation prize at best.\nFigures for women representation are slightly better at the local levels. They made up 40.95% of all elected representatives in local elections in 2017 and 41.21% in 2022 because the Local Level Electoral Act 2017 had made it mandatory for women to either be vice mayor or mayor, and ward member. Still, it did not meet the target of 50% female representation.\nIn both previous elections, nearly all parties fielded women only as vice mayors. Which meant that there were only seven women mayors elected in 2017, and 13 in 2022 \u2014 out of 293 metros and municipalities. The numbers were similar for female rural municipality chairs.\nSays rights activist Stella Tamang: \u201cWomen need to become leaders not only for their community, but for the country as a whole. But most women candidates are made to believe that they are not capable enough to stand for the elections.\u201d\nThe reason for this engrained patriarchy is the belief among the leadership of parties that women candidates do not have voter support, the stamina to deal with intimidation, and that they lack campaign financing capacity.\nThe election commission caps campaign spending at Rs200,000 for PR candidates and Rs2.5 million for FPTP. This rule is widely flouted, but most women candidates cannot even raise that much, and parties choose men who can finance their own campaigns.\nThis has meant that the NC saw only one woman win in 2022: Sita Gurung from Tehrathum. But the NC under its new leadership has elected Pushpa Bhusal as party vice-president, the second woman after Shailaja Acharya 25 years ago to make it to that position.\nFIGHTING WOMEN\nDuring the conflict, one-third of Maoist guerrillas were women and fought against patriarchy and for empowerment. But the NCP\u2019s women representation in the coming elections is only 6%. The two women in direct elections are the daughter and daughter-in-law of party chair Pushpa Kamal Dahal.\nFormer Maoist leader Hisila Yami acknowledges this, and adds: \u201cWe share a similar political system to India, so we may need to follow its footsteps in implementing electoral provisions related to gender.\u201d\nEven in constituencies where there are women candidates in direct ballots, they are pitted against each other. The NCP\u2019s Renu Dahal is up against Shobita Gautam of RSP in Chitwan-3, and the NC\u2019s Sarita Prasai is battling RSP\u2019s Indira Ranamagar in Jhapa-2.\nNo clear winner projected as personalities dominate politics in a clash between old and new\nIn his campaign speech in Janakpur, RSP prime ministerial candidate Balen Shah asked people to vote not because of creed or party loyalty, but for the right people in the right places.\nThe former Kathmandu mayor is contesting from Jhapa-5 which has been former prime minister K P Oli\u2019s stronghold for decades, and creating a frenzy wherever he campaigns. Just like RSP chair Rabi Lamichhane in 2022, Balen Shah is the protest candidate against the establishment.\nJhapa-5 is being keenly watched because in this early election triggered by the GenZ protests, it is seen as a referendum between the old and new, and a chance for a generational transformation in Nepal\u2019s politics. What has thrown a small pall over the RSP, however, was the acquittal by Attorney General Sabita Bhandari this week of Lamichanne and his at-large co-accused in the cooperatives scam. The party\u2019s support was also jolted by a PR list populated by celebrities and businessmen.\nShah\u2019s strategy in contesting from Jhapa rather than his Kathmandu base is a direct message that he is now a politician of national stature. As first choice for prime minister for GenZ activists, he represents their aspirations. But it remains to be seen how much of his vast social media support will translate into physical ballots in March.\nIn an interview with AFP this week Shah said: \u2018This should not be perceived as an egoistic decision. The ripple effect would simply be greater if I contest from Jhapa \u2026 [it] signals that I am not taking the easy way out.\u2019\nUnlike previous polls, this time there are no announced electoral alliances, and this means no party is a clear projected winner. Most of the electoral races are between heavyweight politicians with no clear ideological differences.\nRIPPLE EFFECT\nThe biggest impact of the September protests is seen in the NC which nearly split and elected Gagan Thapa as its new president \u2014 a clear departure from his predecessor Sher Bahadur Deuba who has been prime minister five times since 1995. The NC\u2019s electoral tickets have also gone to new faces.\nThe UML\u2019s K P Oli was prime minister during the GenZ-led protests that ousted his coalition. He has been the most resistant to change and has kept his tight grip on the party. He has sidelined dissidents in ticket allocation, but has fielded new younger candidates.\nHowever, only 16.73% of candidates fall in the 24-35 age bracket, while nearly half are between 35-50. One third of candidates are still between 51-65 and there are a handful above 65.\nThere are 3,484 candidates contesting in 165 constituencies, and 68 political parties are participating while 1,187 are independent candidates. Only 11.34% of candidates are women.\nAs elsewhere in the world, politicians have overshadowed politics and ideology. March promises to be a clash of personalities in which age and populist novelty will be determinant.\n\u201cThere is a culture of male-dominated populism, and unless representation of women is increased in the party hierarchies, gender will take a back seat,\u201d says Hisila Yami. \u201cThere is a failure of progressivism and a rightwing drift across the world.\u201d\nPM Karki\u2019s interim government is called \u2018Ama Sarkar\u2019, and there was hope that her leadership as a motherly figure would bring change. But five of her ministers who rode GenZ support to Cabinet positions have resigned to join various parties \u2014 mostly the RSP.\nConcludes Babita Basnet, \u201cMany young girls and women today can dream of a better tomorrow and a future in politics. Prime Minister Sushila Karki has made that symbolically possible, but that ethos of inclusion has to be espoused by the political parties.\u201d", "url": "https://nepalitimes.com/news/ladies-not-first-past-the-post", "scraped_at": "2026-01-28T16:53:09.766977"}
{"title": "Driving young Nepalis up the wall", "content": "Kalpana Maharjan is the first female journalist to climb Mt Everest from both the Nepal and the China sides. But the Lalitpur native doesn\u2019t just climb mountains for the sake of breaking records.\nIn 2014, Maharjan was attempting Mera Peak in the Khumbu region when she was struck by severe cerebral oedema that put her into a coma for eight days.\n\u201cAfter regaining consciousness I believed that God had given me a second life,\u201d recalls Maharjan. \u201cSo I decided that I would live the rest of my life for the public good.\u201d\nHer first summit of Everest was in 2018, when Maharjan was 34. She climbed from the South Col route with four other Nepali women journalists. Exactly a year later, she summitted again, this time from from the North Col route, naming her expedition 'Back to Everest: A Campaign Against Child Marriage.'\nNow, Maharjan combines her activism with training young Nepalis in sports climbing.\nMaharjan runs awareness programs against child marriage and human trafficking in schools in South Lalitpur: Godavari, Imadol, Dukuchhep. Her first goal is to make the district of Lalitpur free of child marriage. \u201cMy whole goal is to show kids that there is more to life than getting married,\u201d she says.\nShe does this by introducing and training students in Sports Climbing which includes Speed climbing, Lead climbing, and Bouldering.\n\u201cThere are only one or two Nepali athletes dedicated to the sport. So it is possible to train for 3 to 4 years and become an international level climber,\u201d says Maharjan, who trains 150 young athletes, some as young as 7.\nThere are under-14 climbing tournaments, and the idea is to start them young on the walls since their future competitors in the West start as soon as they can walk.\nMaharjan is committed to the sport. She completed judging and route-setting training from the Indian Mountaineering Foundation, is the president of the Bagmati Province\u2019s Sports Climbing Association and is fund-raising to build a climbing wall in Imadol.\nFor the moment, Maharjan\u2019s students use the Pasang Lhamu climbing wall in Dhumbarahi, twice a week and daily during vacations.\n\u201cThe kids are excited about the wall in Imadol, which would allow them to train more often,\u201d says Maharjan. \u201cInterestingly, the ones who are scared of heights often perform the best.\u201d\nBesides training on the climbing wall, Maharjan also counsels her students about their career plans, and hopes that her story inspires them to achieve any goal they want.\nWith programs such as \u2018Tij on the Wall\u2019 during the annual festival for women, Maharjan makes sure the parents are involved too, and that they understand and feel what climbing is like.\nBALANCING ACT\nMaharjan has always had to balance her passion for mountaineering, activism, and sports climbing with the duties and expectations of her family. \u201cMy son helps out a lot, he is very independent and busy, but convincing my parents and husband was a lot of work,\u201d she admits. In fact, her husband only found out that she was going back to climbing Everest after her coma through the news.\n\u201cI understand their concern. After all, the doctor had given me only a 15% chance to live,\u201d she says. \u201cI couldn\u2019t tell them I was going back to the mountains.\u201d\nKalpana\u2019s father even threatened to disown her. But she had already set her mind to it, and was willing to risk any opposition from her parents, and even separation.\nWhile training for her first attempt, she would wake up at three in the morning to get all of her housework done. Then she would leave the house to train at a climbing wall in Balaju, and then go to her journalism job or meet potential sponsors for the climb.\n\u201cAs the eldest daughter-in-law in a traditional Newar household I had a lot of chores when I got home in the evening,\u201d she remembers.\nAs part of the Jyapu farming community, Maharjan is also proud that after working as a journalist producing videos, on the weekends she is at her family\u2019s paddy field in Dhapakhel with a doko on her back.\nEventually, Maharjan\u2019s goal is to have her trainees win medals in international competitions, and develop a reputation for Nepal in the sports climbing world.", "url": "https://nepalitimes.com/here-now/driving-young-nepalis-up-the-wall", "scraped_at": "2026-01-28T16:53:10.385568"}
{"title": "The power of peace", "content": "Bhairav is the fierce manifestation of Lord Shiva, and his strength is depicted in a fearsome face but he is also a protector and guardian.\nThere are eight forms of Bhairav in Kathmandu, and they are all featured in Mukesh Shrestha\u2019s exhibition Bhairav Bhav at Gallery 108 in Darbar Marg. The artist was moved to contemplate the violent September protests through this series of paintings.\n\u201cThe GenZ protests exposed the greedy and aggressive side of leaders in which many young Nepalis lost their lives. Bhairav teaches people that forms of aggression and peace can go hand in hand, and peace can be chosen,\u201d Shrestha explains.\nThe artworks on display have a distinct palette of yellow, black and white, symbolising peace even during turbulent times. \u201cYellow is an auspicious colour for Hindus and Buddhists, it also has religious significance,\u201d he says.\nEach painting is imbued by the black walls of the gallery and spotlight with warm lights. Says gallery manager Pooja Mahato, \u201cThe backdrop is black deliberately so that the visitors\u2019 focus goes more to the artwork and less on the surrounding.\u201d\nEach of the paintings depicts Bhairav\u2019s face in the real form but the bodies are imagined by the artist. This distinction is also made by the use of colours on the face while the body is conspicuously black and white. As Bhairav is one of Lord Shiva\u2019s forms, serpents are an essential part of the portraits.\nThe pieces on Kal Bhairav of Kathmandu Darbar Square and Bagh Bhairav of Kirtipur ooze power from every angle. Kal Bhairav is the Lord of time, and the Bagh Bhairav represents the ferocity of the tiger.\nMeanwhile, Unmatta Bhairav, also known as Digambar sacrificed the greed for life and is depicted naked. Couples who do not have children are blessed with offspring if they worship this Bhairav avatar.\nThen there is Batuk Bhairav, the childish god with a happy face. The blue here creates a vibrant, ritualistic visage even as it emotes calmness. \u201cIt is believed that Bhairav came in this child-like form to fool the demons to destroy them, and is represented through small hands and feet,\u201d explains Mahato.\nShweta Bhairav's face is also depicted exactly the same as it is in Kathmandu Darbar Square. Its body includes the feet of Bhramayani Devi, one of the forms of Nava Durga. It is believed that this form of Bhairav is granted entry in Kathmandu only after the welcome of Bhramayani Devi.\nShweta Bhairav was wrongly identified as the Akash Bhairav when it was chosen as the motif for Royal Nepal Airlines 60 years ago. Despite this, the carrier\u2019s aircraft still carry the wrong Bhairav on their fuselage.\nShanta Bhairav, meanwhile, entered Kathmandu Valley in the form of a human to meet his beloved, Lassi. After agreeing to take the role of the protector for children as many were lost, he was allowed to live in the Valley.\nThe paintings also represent peace and tranquility: lotus flowers emerging from the heads of a male and female body, and military tanks below them.\nSays Mukesh Shrestha, \u201cEach artwork is a journey from ignorance to knowledge. Whatever we think, we become. If we think of peace, we become peaceful, but if we think of destruction, we become destructive.\u201d\nBhairav Bhav\nBy Mukesh Shrestha\nGallery 108, Darbar Marg\nUntil 31 January\n11am-7pm (Mondays by appointment)", "url": "https://nepalitimes.com/review/the-power-of-peace", "scraped_at": "2026-01-28T16:53:11.012907"}
{"title": "Hotter Himalaya melts glaciers", "content": "The pale green ice on the top of the lake gleams in the pale January sunlight. The dark waters beneath are visible through the translucent frozen surface.\nThis is Thulagi Glacial Lake at the foot of Mt Manaslu in central Nepal, classified as one of themost dangerous lakesto appear in the Himalaya due to climate heating.\nThe place is breathtaking not just because of its 4,050m altitude, but the scenery all around. The beauty belies the threat this expanding lake poses downstream along the Marsyangdi Valley.\nThe lake lies at the terminus of the 4.5km long Thulagi Glacier. The local Gurung inhabitants call it Dona Tal. They say it started appearing in the 1960s. Local guide Chandra Bahadur Gurung, 47, has been ferrying trekkers to the spot for about 20 years.\n\u201cDona used to be small, but it has now grown bigger,\u201d he says, gesturing to how the glacier has receded and shrunk. Trekkers used to be able to go to the other side, but now the glacier is riddled with ponds and boulders falling off the moraine that make it dangerous.\nGurung adds rather matter-of-factly: \u201cThe lake will burst sooner or later.\u201d\nKathmandu-based International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD) has been studying Thulagi for the past two decades. Topographic maps from the 1960s and early satellite images show the lake being much smaller.\nWhen theMarsyangdi Hydropower Projectproject was being built in 1994, the German Institute of Geology and Natural Resources with the Department of Hydrology and Meteorology measured the lake to be already 2km in length. More recent surveys show the lake has increased its size since then to more than 1 sq km.\nThe lake is among 47dangerous glacial lakes in Nepal and Tibetidentified by ICIMOD in 2020 due to its size, the risk of landslides and avalanches, and the gradual collapse of the lake\u2019s ice-core moraine dam.\nIn 2018 a team of glaciologists led by Umesh K Haritasyapublished a journal articleabout the evolution of three glacial lakes including Thulagi, Lower Barun, and Imja. Even back in 1976, Thulagi was twice the size ofImja glacial lakein the Khumbu and six times the size of the Lower Barun. The team measured the lake\u2019s depth at 79m, and calculated that it held 36.1 million m3 of water.\nSince then, Thulagi has been growing at a slower rate than the other two lakes because it is shielded by shadows of mountains. There is also not as much glacial calving in the narrow valley.\nNonetheless, scientists and experts have long warned that a Glacial Lake Outburst Flood (GLOF) from Thulagi poses a big risk to four hydropower projects on the Marsyangdi and settlements like Besisahar and Dumre (map).\nThe lake feeds into Dona Khola, a tributary of the Marsyangdi where the 49.9MW Dona Khola hydropower project is being built at a cost of Rs10 billion. Another 42MW Super Dona Khola project is planned on the river.\n\u201cOne of the trigger points that could lead to a glacial lake outburst could be the steep lateral moraine, which might be weakened by rapidly melting permafrost,\u201d says Scott Watson, a University of Leeds researcher who was part of the team that conducted the 2018 study.\nLocals are already witnessing what Watson describes. They say that it was easy to reach Thulagi\u2019s headwaters even until a few years ago, but that is now dangerous because of ice and rockfalls.\nGLOF WARNING\nGlaciologist Rijan Bhakta Kayastha has been studying Thulagi since 1994, and was part of a team that discovered that the lake\u2019s terminal moraine was made up of rocky soil on top and ice at its core.\nIn 2020, Kayastha's team published a study that modelled the route of a possible GLOF. They found that if the lake burst, it would take 2.5 hours to reach Dharapani, and 4 hours to reach Bahundanda 39km downstream.\nThe surge would be 13.7m high at Dharapani and 15m by the time it reached Taal, the village most at risk because it is situated only a few metres above the Marsyangdi.\n\u2018Considering the size of the Thulagi glacial lake and its dam, it seems unlikely that a rock fall or avalanche would cause the lake to breach the moraine dam,\u201d concluded the study. \u201cBut an earthquake or climate change would require a separate study. At present, there is no immediate or imminent threat of this glacier bursting.\u201d\nMEMORIES OF 2021\nAcross Manang valley, residents are haunted by the memories of the2021 flood on the Marsyangdithat swept away parts of Chame, Dharapani, Naso, and Taal villages.\nKamarkali Gurung, grew up on the banks of the Marsyangdi in Dharapani, and had never imagined that the tranquil river she knew could become such a monster. She had saved up to build her own three-story property with 17 rooms.\nHer family was away that June evening when the flood swept away her hotel. \u201cNot even a spoon remained, everything was gone,\u201d says Kamarkali. \u201cLosing the hotel hurt like losing a loved one. The Marsyangdi flows through my house now, I can never go back.\u201d\nSurendra Gurung, also a hotelier, was in Dharapani the night of the flood, and can still remember the fear as the river roared towards the village. \u201cI did not know if I would live or die,\u201d he says.\nSirantal village was merely 10m above the Marsyangdi, and was completely destroyed by the flood. Thirty-two people were rescued by army helicopters, and most of the families have now relocated to Taal.\nOne of them is Singha Bahadur Gurung who also ran a lodge for 20 years. \u201cWe did not have to buy anything except rice, the soil in Sirantal was so fertile,\u201d he remembers.\nMarsyangdi now flows through where Singha Gurung\u2019s village used to be. \u201cEver since the flood, I am terrified every time it rains from June to August,\u201d he says.\nThe 2021 flood was during the monsoon, and was caused by unusually heavy rainfall in the catchment. A GLOF on the Marsyangdi would be much more destructive.\nRoshni Ghale, 46, runs a hotel in Taal, and escaped with her family to a nearby cave as the flood engulfed nearby homes.\n\u201cWe spent the next six months after the flood rebuilding our lives, going to bed hungry many a night,\u201d she recalls. In the four years since, tourism has picked up again, but thecommunity is still traumatised.\nIn the wake of the floods, the government had begun talks to rehabilitate and repatriate the community, but until now, they have beenempty promises. In any case, the people here, most of them experienced hoteliers whose livelihood depends on tourism, are unwilling to uproot their lives and start over elsewhere.\nDISASTER PREPAREDNESS\nEven though studies have assessed the risk of GLOFs in Manang and across Nepal, and warned about the damage that such floods could cause, it took until 2021 for early warning systems to be installed on the banks of the Marsyangdi and in the town of Taal.\nBut beyond that, there has been little preparedness. Early warning systems and disaster preparedness are necessary not just along the Marsyangdi but also at and around Thulagi itself, say experts.\nLocals here are becoming increasingly aware of the risk posed by the expanding lake up the valley, but are reluctant to leave homes and communities that they have lived in for generations. The hydropower projects on the Dona Khola promises jobs, and the local government is upgrading the hiking trail to Thulagi Lake which has become a tourist attraction.\n\u201cManang now getstoo little snow and too much rain, and the Marsyangdi charts its own course,\u201d says Min Rashi Gurung, chair of Ward-1 of Naso rural municipality, where Thulagi is located.\nBut help may be on the way.Last year, the Green Climate Fund (GCF) approved a $36.1 million grant to help Nepal reduce risk of GLOFs in Thulagi and four other glacial lakes. The project is managed by the government and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).\nThe project is set to begin next fiscal year, and will reduce the water level in the four glacial lakes including Thulagi, similar to what was done in Imja and Tso Rolpa, says Dinkar Kayastha at the Department of Hydrology and Meteorology.\nCentre for Investigative Journalism - Nepal", "url": "https://nepalitimes.com/multimedia/hotter-himalaya-melts-glaciers", "scraped_at": "2026-01-28T16:53:12.046269"}
{"title": "How much ice must melt before we act?", "content": "The Himalaya is melting twice as fast as the global average, and this is accelerated by air pollution. Called black carbon, suspended particles emitted by industries, vehicle exhaust, or forest fires accelerate glacial retreat in High Asia. Dark matter makes the ice melt faster (as seen in Kapuche Lake in Kaski, pictured above).\nThe snowline is already retreating up the mountains due to winter drought and global warming, and this process is quickened by black carbon and reduced snowfall.\nThe Cryosphere Report 2025 by the International Cryosphere Climate Initiative (ICCI) underscores these alarming trends. Between 2000 and 2023, mountain glaciers lost an average of 273 gigatons of ice per year. Even the higher central and eastern regions of High Mountain Asia are projected to lose up to 60% of existing ice under a 1.5\u00b0C warming scenario and only 15% may remain if it touches 3\u00b0C.\nThe Hindu Kush and Karakoram were relatively stable in recent decades, but may lose 40% of their ice under a 2\u00b0C future but only 15% under a 1.5\u00b0C pathway.\nThese losses are not merely physical or environmental. They translate into long-term water, food, economic, and political insecurity for millions. According to the report, such cryosphere-driven impacts should be considered permanent on human time scales.\n\u201cFrozen systems are highly sensitive to seasonal changes, and their degradation can dramatically increase hazards such as rockfalls and landslides, threatening communities, infrastructure,\u201d Hugues Lantuit, Researcher at the Alfred Wegener Institute, told Nepali Times in Bel\u00e9m. \u201cThis is why we need collaboration between researchers, local governments, and communities that translate scientific knowledge into practical adaptation strategies.\u201d\nAt COP30 in Bel\u00e9m, global climate negotiations faced widespread criticism for sidelining key science. Major emitter countries were held unaccountable, and progress on phasing out fossil fuels was delayed. Only 88 countries have voluntarily supported a roadmap to phase out fossil fuels. While the biggest emitters continue to delay commitments, countries in the Global South bear the brunt of climate impact.\nSince science was not sufficiently prioritised, important topics like the cryosphere received limited attention. Most cryosphere related events at COP30 were organised at a pavilion jointly hosted by ICCI and Iceland, but attendance was low, reflecting how glacier and permafrost loss remain niche topics within broader climate negotiations.\nNepal participated in the High-Level Meeting on Global Impacts of Cryosphere Loss and Paths of Return from Overshoot, organised by Iceland/Ambition on Melting Ice (AMI) high-level group and Tajikistan. Pakistan\u2019s Secretary of Climate Change Aisha Humera, noted that glaciers in the Hindu Kush and Karakoram region are melting rapidly, impacting livelihoods and requiring massive adaptation efforts.\nAKM Sohel of the Bangladesh Ministry of Finance drew attention to his country being at risk from record-breaking cyclones, storms, and long-term coastal flooding.\n\u201cAchieving the 1.5\u00b0C target is essential, and climate finance is necessary to implement adaptation measures nationwide,\u201d Sohel said.\nThe latest cryosphere assessments further underline the urgency of immediate and deep reductions in greenhouse gas emissions globally. Reports recommend aiming for global temperature targets closer to 1\u00b0C to preserve as much of the cryosphere as possible. This requires more ambitious climate action, combined monitoring of cryosphere changes, adapting to impact, and mitigating future damage.\nThe cryosphere is at a tipping point, and its loss has immediate consequences for water security, livelihoods, infrastructure, and climate justice. Across High Asia, melting glaciers and thawing permafrost threaten communities and those living downstream.With support from Earth Journalism Network.", "url": "https://nepalitimes.com/news/how-much-ice-must-melt-before-we-act", "scraped_at": "2026-01-28T16:53:12.855850"}
{"title": "The Himalaya is not fragile", "content": "International Mountain Day on 11 December should inspire celebration, not cynicism. It follows \u00a0a small but rare diplomatic win: the agreement at COP30 in Bel\u00e9m to hold a dedicated global dialogue on mountains in 2026, and to include mountain-specific indicators in the new climate adaptation framework.\nA welcome shift, certainly. But the old narrative lingers \u2014 mountains are fragile, disaster-prone, eternally vulnerable. But the uncomfortable truth is that safe and environment-friendly development in the mountains is simply too expensive than anyone wants to admit.\nTo build a kilometre of two-lane highway in the Tarai costs Rs200 million. That same kilometre on a Himalayan slope with retaining walls, drainage, bioengineering, and landslide protection costs more than Rs1 billion. Add tunnels, viaducts or highways designed for minimum 80km/h speeds and that figure can easily triple.\nThis pattern repeats across all sectors. A 50MW run-of-river hydropower plant that costs $80 million in low-ling valleys costs four times more in the mountains. The headrace tunnels have to be longer, desanding basins must trap the silt, the access roads cost more than the entire project. And there is no way to prevent the scheme from being washed away by a glacial collapse flood.\nNepal's annual road budget is only Rs150 billion. It is scattered thinly across 753 municipalities, most of them perched on steep, unstable slopes. When resources are inadequate and political cycles are short, the incentives for corruption are predictable \u00a0\u2014 shaving a mountain flank at 70 degrees instead of 45, taking a shortcut on drainage canals, skimping on asphalt thickness, or skipping the Gabion.\nIn high Nepal, the bulldozer is the engineer. We hang on the prayer that the monsoon will be merciful. July arrives, and reality returns. Mountains fall on roads, flash floods wash away swathes of expensive highways.\nThe entrance to the Siddhababa Tunnel in Palpa collapses yet again. The Nagdhunga Tunnel faces another landslide delay. The Melamchi headworks go under \u2014 again. Each failure costs more to repair than proper engineering would have cost when that infrastructure was built.\nWe are not just paying once. We the taxpayers are signing up for a subscription to disaster. The real fragility of Nepal\u2019s mountains is of governance, not geology.\nThis is what the international climate conversation habitually misses. Mountain communities are repeatedly told to \u2018respect nature\u2019 and avoid linear infrastructure, often by the same countries proudly announcing new expressways and airports in their own countries.\nMountain people are not anti-development. They want what everyone else wants: electricity that does not flicker, roads that survive the monsoon, schools their children can reach in winter. What they lack is not aspiration, it is the budget required to build things safely that is not stolen by politicians and their crony contractors.\nIf the world truly wants to protect the Himalaya, Andes or Alps, and the billions who rely on them for water, the answer is not more romantic slogans about fragility of the mountains. It is concessional, patient financing that narrows the gap between cheap and dangerous versus expensive and resilient. And it is transparent government that spends that money wisely.\nThis means money for tunnels instead of unstable surface cuts. Money for bioengineered slopes instead of naked bulldozer scars. Money for hydropower built for 1-in-100-year floods, not 1-in-25-year budgets.\nThis is not charity. Mountain infrastructure safeguards global water, carbon, energy and biodiversity systems. It is a global public good, and should be financed as such.\nIn Syangja, small investments under the Climate Adaptive Equitable Water Management Practices have restored nine community ponds, protected recharge zones and increased dry-season spring flow by about a third. All of this for less than the cost of repairing a single kilometre of poorly built hillside road after the next landslide.\nOur experience from the Subnational Governance Programme (SNGP) in some districts of mountains and plains show that when municipalities receive practical guidance backed by scientific research, they can scale these solutions with modest, targeted budgets. Local governments are not the problem \u2014 they are the missing link.\nThe tragedy is not technical incapacity; it is chronic under-financing of the most cost-intensive terrain on earth. Lets stop romanticising mountain poverty on 11 December, International Mountain Day. Let us retire the language of fragility that excuses inaction.\nMountains are not pleading for sympathy. They are demanding fairness: that the true cost of safe development in the world\u2019s steepest geographies be acknowledged and shared. Until that bill is paid, the monsoon will continue to do the accounting, one landslide, one road, one abandoned promise at a time.\nNgamindra Dahal is a water and climate adaptation practitioner based at the Nepal Water Conservation Foundation, Kathmandu.", "url": "https://nepalitimes.com/opinion/guest-editorial/the-himalaya-is-not-fragile", "scraped_at": "2026-01-28T16:53:13.974437"}
{"title": "Time, transience, transition", "content": "We walk past familiar neighbourhoods and wonder how much it has changed. An ongoing exhibition at The Kal\u0101 Salon titled Changing Times aims to do just that -- capture ever-changing society within a captivating display of colourful canvases.\nBrick-lined houses, local tea shops, ancient temples, quiet devotion are themes in Pradhumna Shrestha\u2019s series Shangri-La, much of which is an imagined past filled with nostalgia of the place he grew up in. By keeping people out of the frame, he allows space for what he calls a divine aura to surface.\n\u201cI was born and brought up here and my canvases echo the nostalgia of cities like Kathmandu, Bhaktapur, and Lalitpur which are dense with myth, folklore, religion, and an ever-present divinity. All of this is truly what is ours, and we must treasure it,\u201d says Shrestha. \u201cWhatever I truly felt in my heart, I translated it into my work.\u201d\nThe swirling clouds that drift across Shrestha\u2019s canvases borrow from thangka and paubha traditions, lending the scenes a sense of mysticism and otherworldliness. Within this dreamscape are red circular forms which represent wheels of chariots. \u00a0The presence of divinity dominates from above, its presence asserted in soft blue brushstrokes below, as if the deity\u2019s gaze itself has seeped into the land. Gods linger as guardians and temples hum with enigma in his paintings.\nIn his much earlier work, Cultural Bond, a lakhe masked dancer bursts forward in vibrant red, dancing against a backdrop of molten gold clouds. The lakhe\u2019s trance signifies protection and where it steps, the evil cannot follow. Hence, the skulls that surround but never fall beneath its feet but, one leg hangs suspended in midair, suggesting uncertainty, raising questions.\nIs this a symbol of culture and tradition, secure, or is it endangered by modernity? The work captures a society at a crossroads, honouring tradition while grappling with the risk of drifting away from it.\nIn Panchatatva Mandala, Pasang Bikram Lama fuses two mandalas into a single visual meditation, suggesting unity where each colour carries symbolic weight: yellow evokes the soil of the earth, blue flows as water, red burns with fire, and black opens into the vastness of the spatial sky. Together, these elements form a quiet cosmology that speaks of creation and dissolution, of life folding endlessly into death and returning again. Says Lama, \u201cEveryone has a mandala of their own being, and the elements represent their cycle of life.\u201d\nMala Shrestha\u2019s works Water of the Divine Mother and The Spirit of Serenity unfold in a dreamy and delicate fusion of nature and religion, suggesting that divine forms are not separate from the natural world. Trees and branch-like motifs appear as origins of sacred sculptures and spiritual presences.\nHer goddesses, adorned in alluring ornaments, emerge from trunks and streams, painted in aqua green, pink pastels, and rustic browns, as if grown rather than created, affirming that the divine is inseparable from nature and present everywhere.\nKishor Nakarmi\u2019s Essence of Nepal, where Gautam Buddha appears embedded within leaves, brick walls, birds, and wilderness, dissolving boundaries between the sacred and the earthly. These canvases radiate calm and their subtlety is enriched by finely observed details.\nSimilarly, Rudra Bahadur Pun captures the vitality of mask dances and ritual movements found in the monasteries of Mustang, weaving together tradition, landscape, and daily life.\nThe essence of the exhibition comes together in Roshan Pradhan\u2019s works. His paintings reflect a contemporary tension where technology collides with ancestral myth and the power of tradition. A fierce Garud rises within a landscape saturated by technological apparatuses, while at its feet a human form representing AI clings tightly, attempting to assert control.\nIn another work, Bhairab confronts a human embodiment of AI in a theatrical standoff, with the deity ultimately prevailing, reaffirming endurance over technological dominance. The human figures in Pradhan\u2019s paintings are drawn from life with his friends volunteering as models, photographed and later translated onto canvas.\n\u201cTechnology has taken over our lives. Many can probably not even imagine life without it now. But, culture, too, is integral to human existence. Our life would be much different without our culture; it is a part of us,\u201d notes the artist.\nRather than framing technology as purely antagonistic, Pradhan explores coexistence, and while acknowledging its destructive potential, he affirms his belief in the power of our myths and traditions.\nPradhan adds, \u201cThese paintings are also an archive of its time. Viewers centuries from now may read these paintings as records of the age we inhabit. While technology is important, cultural continuity must walk alongside it. Festivals must still be celebrated, oral traditions must be sustained, and our roots must be remembered, especially by future generations.\u201d\nCurator Sophia L Pande says the exhibition took more than a year to put together:\n\u201cIt responds to a shifting world, seeking to capture both transformation and the quiet fear of loss. Its themes move fluidly across environment, technology, artificial intelligence, and climate change, reflecting the diverse yet interconnected practices of the artists, providing a glimpse into the evolving landscape of contemporary Nepali art.\u201d\nChanging Times\nThe Kal\u0101 Salon\nChhaya Centre, Thamel\n11AM-8PM", "url": "https://nepalitimes.com/review/time-transience-transition", "scraped_at": "2026-01-28T16:53:15.084484"}
{"title": "Nepal\u2019s slow grammar of democracy", "content": "The slow, arduous labour of democracy rarely announces itself with the fanfare of constitutional moments. \u00a0It proceeds instead through committee rooms, ward meetings, half-attended assemblies, the awkward choreography of speech and silence, and the everyday compromises between aspiration and constraint.\nThe book Nepal\u2019s Federalism and the Pursuit of Deliberative Democracy attends precisely to this unglamorous terrain. In it, Vishnu Kumari Tandon does not ask whether democracy is desirable \u2014 an already settled question \u2014 but whether it can be made to think, to listen, and to endure under conditions of inequality, historical fracture, and institutional novelty.\nHer wager is modest yet demanding: that federalism, when tethered to participatory planning and deliberative fors, might recalibrate the relationship between state and citizen without promising redemption.\nTandon\u2019s Nepal is neither a site of democratic salvation nor a study in failure. It is a space of trial, where ideas migrate from constitutional text to municipal practice, altered by context, power, and expectation. Democracy here appears not as an ideal form but as a situated practice -- procedural, contested, and unfinished.\nThe book\u2019s quiet achievement lies in redirecting debates on deliberative democracy away from abstract normativity and toward the ethical friction of lived institutions.\nFederalism arrives in Nepal not as a technocratic reform but as a historical concession, wrested from conflict, exclusion, and prolonged political unrest. Tandon, who is a governance consultant at the World Bank, situates the 2015 Constitution within this unsettled genealogy, treating federalism less as an administrative innovation than as a moral response to longstanding claims of marginalisation.\nThe constitutional recognition of local autonomy is thus freighted with ethical expectation. Yet the book refuses to equate decentralisation with empowerment. Federalism, Tandon insists, redistributes power without dissolving hierarchy.\nDomination may simply reappear closer to home. The central question, therefore, is not whether local governments exist, but how they govern: whether institutionalised participation genuinely alters the terms on which citizens speak, decide, and contest public priorities.\nFederalism emerges not as a stable structure but as a field of tension\u2014between autonomy and dependence, inclusion and capture, aspiration and capacity. It is within this unstable terrain that the democratic experiment unfolds.\nUNEQUAL SKIES\nParticipation, one of democracy\u2019s most invoked terms, often risks conceptual exhaustion. Tandon restores its weight by treating participation as labour rather than ritual. Drawing on fieldwork in Buddhabhumi and Dhanushadham municipalities, she reconstructs the choreography of local planning: assemblies, committees, and councils through which proposals circulate, stall, or vanish.\nParticipation here is unevenly distributed. It is shaped by gendered expectations, caste hierarchies, economic precarity, and anticipations of return. Attendance becomes a calculation rather than a civic reflex. This analytical attention to motivation marks one of the book\u2019s strengths.\nCitizens participate not out of abstract virtue but through pragmatic reasoning, moral obligation, and strategic interest. Participation thus appears neither ennobling nor cynical, but politically intelligible.\nIf participation concerns presence, deliberation concerns voice \u2014 and, crucially, whose voice matters. Tandon\u2019s engagement with deliberative democratic theory is respectful yet revisionist. Habermasian ideals of reasoned consensus are treated as aspirational rather than portable, strained by structural inequality.\nIn municipal assemblies, deliberation is patterned by authority: who speaks first, who commands attention, whose claims are legitimised. Marginalised citizens may be present without influence, audible without consequence. Deliberation risks becoming procedural affirmation rather than substantive redistribution of voice.\nYet Tandon does not abandon deliberation as a democratic practice. Instead, she broadens its normative horizon. Drawing on second-generation deliberative theory, she legitimises emotion, self-interest, and strategic speech as components of democratic reasoning. Deliberation becomes a contested exchange rather than a purified rationality. The common good, if it appears, emerges provisionally: negotiated rather than presumed.\nOne of the book\u2019s most original contributions lies in its treatment of fiscal decentralisation. Money is not merely a resource but a language through which priorities are articulated and participation structured. The devolution of budgetary authority transforms deliberation into distributive politics.\nCitizens attend assemblies not simply to speak but to secure roads, water systems, clinics, schools. Voice is tethered to material expectation. This proximity intensifies engagement while sharpening conflict. Fiscal autonomy thus amplifies the stakes of deliberation without guaranteeing its equity.\nLocal representatives emerge as paradoxical figures: empowered yet constrained, accountable yet insulated. Tandon resists binary judgments, showing instead how fiscal decentralisation deepens democratic possibility while exposing institutional fragility.\nThreaded through the book is a sustained interrogation of the \u2018common good\u2019. Revered in theory and suspect in practice, the concept is neither discarded nor sanctified. In unequal societies, appeals to the common good can obscure asymmetries of sacrifice.\nEmpirically, deliberation proceeds through articulated self-interests: neighbourhood demands, caste claims, gendered priorities. Far from undermining democracy, these claims animate it. Self-interest becomes deliberation\u2019s motor rather than its negation.\nThe book thus advances a quiet ethical argument: democracy does not require the transcendence of interest, but its articulation under conditions of mutual visibility. The common good, if it exists, is emergent, fragile, and revisable.\nInstitutions, for Tandon, are moral technologies. Laws mandate participation, but they cannot generate trust, courage, or equality. Procedural compliance may coexist with substantive exclusion. Yet repetition matters. Even imperfect fora can cultivate habits of speaking and being heard.\nDeliberative democracy, the book suggests, is not an event but a discipline, learned slowly, unevenly, and reversibly. Federalism is less a solution than a condition: one that opens space for democratic learning without securing its outcome.\nFirmly grounded in Nepal\u2019s political history, the book resists parochialism. Nepal functions as a mirror, reflecting broader dilemmas of democratic deepening across unequal societies. Comparative resonances with Brazil, India, and donor-driven governance reforms are handled without formula or prescription. Nepal is neither an exemplar nor an exception. It is a site where democracy reveals its ordinary difficulties.\nThe prose mirrors the argument: careful, analytic, resistant to grand claims. What lingers is not a verdict but a sensibility: an attentiveness to democracy\u2019s tempo. Deliberative democracy appears less as consensus achieved than as disagreement sustained without rupture.\nIn an age of democratic impatience, Tandon offers a quieter ethic. Democracy must be allowed to think slowly, to falter, and to learn. This book stands as a thoughtful companion to that discipline, reminding us that democratic transformation often occurs far from the centre, in places where speaking itself remains an achievement.\nAftab Husain is a Pakistan-born poet and literary and cultural critic. He teaches South Asian literature and culture at the University of Vienna.", "url": "https://nepalitimes.com/review/nepal-s-slow-grammar-of-democracy", "scraped_at": "2026-01-28T16:53:16.115049"}
{"title": "Turning trash into sculptures", "content": "A mighty metal bird, \u2018Heron on Hunt\u2019 spreads its wings and unhinges its mouth hungrily. It looks down at \u2018The Defending Crab,\u2019 which has windshield wipers for legs and opens its pincers defiantly at the heron, daring it to attack.\nThe crab shell is made of a ceiling fan, the blades of which have been cut up to form the bird\u2019s wings.\n\u201cThe story is that you are what you eat,\u201d says artistSaurab Koirala, whose solo exhibition \u2018Metamorphosis\u2019 atTaragaon Nexthas sculptures made of material retrieved from garbage warehouses.\nKoirala was in the studio when protestors ransacked the adjacent Hyatt Hotel on 9 September. The windows of the iconic museum designed byarchitect Carl Pruschain the 1960s were all shattered, but the studio survived. He used the broken glass to make fins for his fish sculptures and wings for insects.\nMetamorphosis is a reference to the transformation of trash into art, but it is also fitting because many of the repurposed items are of insects: a firefly, a dung beetle, a spider, a dragonfly, a queen ant.\nThe most striking are the pair of praying mantises, the smaller one is black, made of windshield wipers, and the larger grey one is made of a motorcycle silencer, bicycle parts, and a fluorescent tube holder.\nAbout the unrealistic size difference, Koirala notes that each piece is made of a component that defines its size. For the larger grey mantis, the defining piece is the silencer that makes up its torso.\n\u201cThe mantises are mating,\u201d Koirala explains. \u201cThe female mantis will cannibalise the male afterwards, and the dragonfly witnesses the whole scene.\u201d\nIt is possible to look at each installation and immediately recognise what it is meant to be, but on looking closer we see what the parts are made of, and how. The exhibition is from Koirala\u2019s Taragaon Next residency program sponsored by the Saraf Foundation.\nKoirala thinks of himself as primarily a painter and a caricature artist, and not a sculptor. His mother was a teacher, and would make miniature animals, gods, houses for her students.\n\u201cSeeing how happy she was doing that made me want to do it too, although she did not want me to be an artist,\u201d Koirala recalls. Some of his mother\u2019s creations are also on display at the exhibition.\nKoirala got more experience working with 3D models digitally in his work at Incessant Rain animation studio, especially animals. This seems to have given him strong visualisation skills that he has put to use in the art pieces, using minimal bending and cutting.\nKoirala participated in the WastArt Competition in 2018, where his Danphe sculpture made from colourful coke and soda cans was so striking that it became a part of the permanent collection at the Sagarmatha Next Art Gallery in Syangboche. Koirala worked in the studio in Khumbu, fashioning yaks and bees out of trekking trash.\n\u201cMy back hurts,\u201d he grimaces as he opens the doors to the studio, an unassuming shed a short walk from the exhibition which is littered with metal spare parts for future art. He has gone through three whole bicycles with a power saw.\nKoirala seems to want to alter the scrap as little as possible, and it is uncanny how well some of it fits the pieces. The aerodynamic curved fuel tank of a Bajaj Avenger motorcycle becomes the abdomen of a gigantic queen ant. A mosquito repellent becomes the green body of a spider. A stapler and a coconut turn into a snail. The steel legs of a rolling office chair curve exactly into the legs and paws of a fox in motion.\n\u201cI did not want the animals to be in static poses. I wanted to capture dynamic movement,\u201d says Koirala. Fittingly, most of the parts he has chosen have come from vehicles: bicycles, motorcycles, scooters, car horns, air filters.\nWhile Koirala\u2019s work in his Sagarmatha Next residency was about waste encroaching into nature in the mountains, his work in Metamorphosis is a nostalgic memory of a happy childhood in Biratnagar.\n\u2018There used to be abundant dragonflies in my hometown,\u2019 writes Koirala in his description. \u201cAs kids, we would catch them and tie threads to their tails and fly them like kites.\u201d\nThe message about the degradation of nature is more valid than ever. The world is seeing the mass extinction of insects, and uncontrolled urbanisation of polluted Kathmandu Valley means only ants and some spiders survive.\nArtist in Studio #9:Metamorphosis\nTaragaon Next\nTill 30 January\n10AM-5:30PM", "url": "https://nepalitimes.com/review/turning-trash-into-sculptures", "scraped_at": "2026-01-28T16:53:17.158680"}
{"title": "Paddy down 4.4%", "content": "Nepal\u2019s paddy production is projected to reach 5.5 million tonnes, 4.2% lower than last year. The Ministry of Agriculture has identified out-migration, drought, and land fragmentation as reasons. Rice accounts for 12% of Nepal\u2019s GDP.", "url": "https://nepalitimes.com/business/paddy-down-4-4-4huc8hb7", "scraped_at": "2026-01-28T16:53:17.969983"}
{"title": "NEA monopoly ends", "content": "The Open Access Directive 2025 allows private hydro producers to sell electricity directly, ending the NEA\u2019s monopoly. The directive allows power plants above 1MW to sell to Nepali businesses. The NEA will still oversee these transactions. The GoN is incentivising private sector participation hoping to reach 28,500MW generation by 2035.", "url": "https://nepalitimes.com/business/nea-monopoly-ends", "scraped_at": "2026-01-28T16:53:19.091464"}
{"title": "US Embassy hackathon", "content": "The US Embassy is holding a nationwide hackathon, challenging participants to build tech solutions for local challenges in education, tourism, and commerce. The six-month program is aimed at students, early-career pros, and entrepreneurs. The program will connect promising projects with mentorship and investment.", "url": "https://nepalitimes.com/business/us-embassy-hackathon", "scraped_at": "2026-01-28T16:53:20.217644"}
